# MPRS8
A Rust compiler for the 8-bit family of Microchip PIC microcontrollers.

Rust is being heralded as the language that might finally beat C out of the embedded systems market, and yet it still isn't available for the PIC devices, one of the most popular line of hobbyist microchip processors. This compiler would be an alternative to the XC8 compiler provided by Microchip (or the third-party HI_TEC compiler), allowing developers to write Rust code instead of C code for the PIC. If this exploration is successful, it would branch into the 16-bit family and 32-bit family of microcontrollers as well.

For now, this repo is just a reminder to myserlf to explore this possibility. Does Rust generate intermediate assembly? Using the include files provided with MPASM, it might not be too difficult to modify the instruction set it generates.

Okay, so here's the deal. The Rust compiler uses the LLVM framework. The front-end of the compiler should be usable without modification. It generates an intermediate LLVM "machine code abstraction". I would need to write a backend that maps that abstraction to PIC assembly / true machine code. A PIC16 backend was a part of the LLVM 2.8 release, but was dropped in the next version. Could use that as a starting point. As for the PIC headers, they're mostly pre-processor defines and might be useable as-is (since they're C). Even if not useable as is, it would be a simple (if tedious) task of converting them to something useable by rust.

After some interaction with the LLVM mailing list, it seems that the old PIC backend went dead because the developer didn't follow the design methodologies of the project and didn't provide a testable builtbot. If I want official support, I'll need to make a pretty big commitment there. It seems that the better option would be to get something here on my personal github, and once the foundation is laid, I can email the devlist again and ask for the help of interested developers. We'll work towards getting it up to the LLVM standards and eventually bring it in. The commitment will be much more manageable if I get the help of several LLVM developers once I've laid the groundwork, and then the maintenance responsibilities won't be entirely on my shoulders.
